---
slug: step1
id: v9oyqws57biv
type: challenge
title: Step 1
notes:
- type: text
  contents: |
    After completing this scenario, you will be able to run tools based on the Security Content Automation Protocol (SCAP) standard for compliance and vulnerability scanning

    # Concepts included in this scenario:
    * Download the packages necessary for OpenSCAP and the SCAP security guide
    * Explore the scanning profiles available to use
    * Run the scan and generate an HTML report
    * Remediate an issue found during the scan
    * Re-run the scan to ensure the issue is remediated

    # Example Usecase:
    The Chief Security Officer (CSO) of your organization has requested that a compliance scan be conducted to meet the PCI-DSS requirements.
tabs:
- title: Terminal
  type: terminal
  hostname: rhel
- title: OpenSCAP Report
  type: service
  hostname: rhel
  path: /
  port: 80
difficulty: basic
timelimit: 3420
---
# Installing the SCAP packages

**SCAP** (Security Content Automation Protocol) is a NIST project that standardizes the language for describing assessment criteria and findings. **OpenSCAP**, available in RHEL, is a SCAP based compliance toolkit that includes policies and tools that allows you to scan and evaluate host machines.

>_NOTE:_ There are 2 tabs that will be used in this lab - a terminal tab for running the scanner (indicated by *Terminal*), and a browser tab for viewing the OpenSCAP report (indicated by *OpenSCAP Report*).

Prior to getting started, we will install the package that consists of the command line interface of the OpenSCAP scanner (*oscap*). OpenSCAP also has a graphical tool called *SCAP workbench*, but in this lab, we will only be using the command line interface. We will also install the SCAP Security guide, which implements security guidance rules and remediation scripts by respective authorities, namely PCI DSS, STIG, etc. In this lab, we will scan the system against the PCI DSS profile.

Ensure that apache server, OpenSCAP scanner and definitions are installed with the command below; it’s safe to run even if the packages already exist. OpenSCAP is not dependant on apache server, however it is needed in this lab for the purposes of viewing the HTML report generated by OpenSCAP.

```
yum install -y httpd openscap-scanner scap-security-guide
```

After installing, all SCAP Security Guide security policies are in the */usr/share/xml/scap/ssg/content/* directory.

```
ls /usr/share/xml/scap/ssg/content
```

There are files for every platform available in a form of XCCDF, OVAL or datastream documents. In most of use cases, you want to use the datastreams, which filenames end with *-ds.xml*. SCAP datastreams represent a bundle of profiles which are used to define a compliance policy.

If you are interested in more details about the *openscap* tool check out -

```
man oscap
```
